ayi deva purā kila tvayi svayamuttānaśaye stanandhaye |
parijṛmbhaṇato vyapāvṛte vadane viśvamacaṣṭa vallavī ||1||
ayi deva	O Lord!
purā kila	long ago indeed
tvayi svayam-	(when) Thou by Thyself
uttānaśaye	while lying on the back
stanandhaye	and sucking at the breast (of Yashodaa)
parijṛmbhaṇata:	by yawning
vyapāvṛte vadane	in Thy open mouth
viśvam-acaṣṭa	the universe, was seen
vallavī	by the cowherdess (Yashodaa)
O Lord! Once long ago, as Thou were lying flat on the back, in the lap of Yashodaa and sucking at her breast, Thou yawned. As Thou did so, in Thy open mouth, Thou revealed to her the whole universe.
punarapyatha bālakai: samaṃ tvayi līlānirate jagatpate |
phalasañcayavañcanakrudhā tava mṛdbhojanamūcurarbhakā: ||2||
puna:-api-atha	again also
bālakai: samaṃ	with the children
tvayi līlā-nirate	(when) Thou were engrossed in play
jagatpate	O Lord of the Universe!
phala-sañcaya-	in collecting the fruits
vañcana-krudhā	being cheated and angered (the children)
tava mṛd-bhojanam-	Thy eating of sand
ūcu:-arbhakā:	reported the children
O Lord of the Universe! Again once, as Thou were playing with other children, Thou cheated them in collecting fruits. Angered at this, they reported to Thy mother that Thou had eaten mud.
ayi te pralayāvadhau vibho kṣititoyādisamastabhakṣiṇa: |
mṛdupāśanato rujā bhavediti bhītā jananī cukopa sā ||3||
ayi	O (Thou)
te pralaya-avadhau	Thee at the time of deluge
vibho	O Lord!
kṣiti-toya-ādi-	earth water etc
samasta-bhakṣiṇa:	everything consuming
mṛd-upāśanata:	by eating mud,
rujā bhavet-iti	sickness may be, thus
bhītā jananī	(Thy) frightened mother
cukopa sā	she became angry
O Lord! At the time of the deluge Thou do consume everything earth water etc. Yet Thy mother was frightened that Thou may fall sick by eating mud and so she became angry.
ayi durvinayātmaka tvayā kimu mṛtsā bata vatsa bhakṣitā |
iti mātṛgiraṃ ciraṃ vibho vitathāṃ tvaṃ pratijajñiṣe hasan ||4||
ayi durvinayātmaka	O naughty (one)
tvayā kimu	by you was it
mṛtsā bata	that mud indeed
vatsa bhakṣitā	O son, was eaten
iti mātṛgiraṃ	such the words of Thy mother
ciraṃ vibho	for a long time O Lord
vitathāṃ tvaṃ	as false, Thee
pratijajñiṣe hasan	asserted laughingly
O you naughty one! Is it that you have eaten mud O son!' O Lord! These words of Thy mother, for a long time, Thou kept on denying and laughingly asserted that Thou had not done so.
ayi te sakalairviniścite vimatiścedvadanaṃ vidāryatām |
iti mātṛvibhartsito mukhaṃ vikasatpadmanibhaṃ vyadāraya: ||5||
ayi te	O Boy! Of you
sakalai:-viniścite	by every one asserted
vimati:-cet-	is, if disagreed
vadanaṃ vidāryatām	mouth (please) open
iti mātṛ-vibhartsita:	thus by mother reprimanded
mukhaṃ vikasat-padma-nibham	the mouth opening, lotus like
vyadāraya:	(Thou) opened
O Boy! If you deny what all the others are saying, please open your mouth.' Thus reprimanded by Thy mother, Thou opened Thy mouth as a lotus in full bloom.
api mṛllavadarśanotsukāṃ jananīṃ tāṃ bahu tarpayanniva |
pṛthivīṃ nikhilāṃ na kevalaṃ bhuvanānyapyakhilānyadīdṛśa: ||6||
api mṛl-lava	even a mud trace
darśana-utsukāṃ	eager to see
jananīṃ tāṃ	to mother that
bahu tarpayan-iva	very much trying to please as though,
pṛthivīṃ nikhilāṃ	the earth whole
na kevalaṃ	not only
bhuvanān-api-	the other worlds also
akhilān-adīdṛśa:	entirely showed
Thy mother was eager to see just a trace of mud in Thy mouth. As though to please her, and to give her abundant satisfaction Thou showed her in Thy mouth not only this whole earth but the entire universe.
kuhacidvanamambudhi: kvacit kvacidabhraṃ kuhacidrasātalam |
manujā danujā: kvacit surā dadṛśe kiṃ na tadā tvadānane ||7||
kuhacit-vanam-	somewhere the forests
ambudhi: kvacit	the oceans somewhere
kvacit-abhraṃ	somewhere the sky
kuhacit-rasātalam	somewhere the Rasaatala
manujā: danujā:	human beings, demons
kvacit surā:	somewhere the devas
dadṛśe kiṃ na	seen what not was
tadā tvat-ānane	at that time in Thy mouth
At that time, in Thy mouth what not was seen by Yashodaa? Somewhere the forests and oceans, somewhere the skies and Rasaatala, human beings and demons, gods and devas!
kalaśāmbudhiśāyinaṃ puna: paravaikuṇṭhapadādhivāsinam |
svapuraśca nijārbhakātmakaṃ katidhā tvāṃ na dadarśa sā mukhe ||8||
kalaśa-ambudhi-śāyinaṃ	in the milk ocean, the recliner
puna: para-vaikuṇṭhapada-	as the Paramaatamaa, in the Vaikuntha abode
adhivāsinam	the resident
sva-pura:-ca	in front of herself
nija-arbhaka-ātmakaṃ	as her own son
katidhā	in how many ways
tvām na dadarśa	Thee did not see
sā mukhe	she in (Thy) mouth
Yashodaa saw in Thy mouth the recliner in the milk ocean. Again she saw Paramaatamaa, the resident of the Vaikunth abode. Then she saw Thee as her son in front of her. In how many different ways did she not see Thee.
vikasadbhuvane mukhodare nanu bhūyo'pi tathāvidhānana: |
anayā sphuṭamīkṣito bhavānanavasthāṃ jagatāṃ batātanot ||9||
vikasat-bhuvane	revealing the worlds
mukha-udare	in the inside of the mouth
nanu bhūya:-api	indeed then again also
tathā-vidha-ānana:	that same type of face
anayā sphuṭam-īkṣita:	by her was clearly seen
bhavān-anavasthāṃ	Thou as the infinitude
jagatāṃ	of the universe
bat-ātanot	definitely expounded
In the cavity of Thy mouth she saw all the worlds, where even Thou were present with Thy mouth open, once again, in which again all the worlds were seen; and so on endlessly. This definitely expounded Thou as the infinitude of the universe.
dhṛtatattvadhiyaṃ tadā kṣaṇaṃ jananīṃ tāṃ praṇayena mohayan |
stanamamba diśetyupāsajan bhagavannadbhutabāla pāhi mām ||10||
dhṛta-tattva-dhiyaṃ	holding the reality in the mind
tadā kṣaṇaṃ	at that time for a moment
jananīṃ tāṃ	to the mother
praṇayena mohayan	by affection enchanting (deluding)
stanam-amba diśa-	breast milk O Mother give'
iti-upāsajan	thus embracing
bhagavan-	O Lord!
adbhuta-bāla	O Wonderful Child!
pāhi mām	protect me
At that time for a moment, Yashodaa had a flash of illumination. Thou with affection deluded her and clung to her, calling her 'Mother' and demanded to be suckled. O Lord! Thou the Wondrous Child! Deign to protect me.